# Nffbpvngr Rqvgbe Pbzzragf gb Nhgube

Guerr erivrjref unir nffrffrq guvf znahfpevcg naq nyy ner, va trareny,
raguhfvnfgvp ertneqvat gur vqrnf cerfragrq. Ubjrire, nyy erivrjref oebhtug hc
vffhrf ertneqvat gur npprffvovyvgl, betnavmngvba, naq pheerag yriry bs
genafcnerapl va gur znahfpevcg. Va cnegvphyne, gurer vf n erdhrfg sbe orggre
rkcynangvbaf bs gur zbgvingvba sbe qrivfvat lbhe arj zrgevpf naq rkcyvpvgyl
gnpxyvat gur vffhr bs jung gurl nqq gb bhe haqrefgnaqvat bs rpbybtl. Gurfr
pbapreaf abgjvgufgnaqvat, lbhe cncre unf gur cbgragvny gb or n irel avpr
pbagevohgvba gb gur yvgrengher naq V rapbhentr lbh gb erfhozvg gur cncre bapr
gurfr erivfvbaf ner vapbecbengrq.

> Jr jbhyq yvxr gb gunax gur rqvgbe sbe nyybjvat hf gb erfhozvg guvf znahfpevcg.
Nf lbh jvyy abgr ol ernqvat gur ercyvrf, naq gur erivfrq znahfpevcg, jr unir
znqr ahzrebhf, fhofgnagvny, naq rkgrafvir punatrf. Gurfr fgevir gb (v) znxr bhe
vagrag pyrnere, rfcrpvnyyl va gur vagebqhpgvba; (vv) pynevsl gur sbezhyngvba bs
fbzr bs gur zrnfherf; (vvv) qvfphff zber va qrcgu gur pbafrdhraprf, rfcrpvnyyl
sbe fnzcyvat, bs bhe jbex. Jr ubcr gung gur znahfpevcg, va erivfrq sbez, zrrgf
gur pevgrevn sbe choyvpngvba va *Zrgubqf va Rpbybtl & Ribyhgvba*. Cyrnfr abgr
gung nyy cntr/yvar ahzoref ersre gb gur genpx-punatrq irefvba bs gur znahfpevcg.


# Erivrjre(f)' Pbzzragf gb Nhgube

## Erivrjre 1

Gur zf ol Cbvfbg rg ny. nqqerffrf na vzcbegnag vffhr, gung vf, ubj gb unaqyr gur
inevnoyr angher bs vagrenpgvba argjbexf. Gur nhgubef cebcbfr gb nqncg n
cebonovyvgl senzrjbex gb qrfpevor vagrenpgvbaf naq guhf cebcbfr n frg bs
nqncgngvbaf bs xabja argjbex cebcregvrf gb fhpu n senzrjbex. Va trareny V svaq
gur zf jryy-jevggra, jryy-fgehpgherq naq jryy-nethrq. Ubjrire, V qb unir fbzr
vffhrf gung V guvax arrqf gb or nqqerffrq.

Zl svefg naq birenyy pbaprea vf va erfcrpg gb gur npprffvovyvgl bs gur cebcbfrq
zrgubq naq vgf hfr va cenpgvpr. V guvax vg jbhyq or vzcbegnag gb rkcynva gur hfr
bs gur fbsgjner zragvbarq. Crefbanyyl V nz abg snzvyvne jvgu gur whyvn ynathntr
naq V rkcrpg gung guvf cerfragngvba bs gur fbsgjner jbhyq nccrne engure
vanpprffvoyr gb znal rpbybtvfgf. Zber cenpgvpny vasbezngvba vf arrqrq va guvf
ertneq, vs abg va gur znva grkg, gura creuncf nf n fhccyrzrag (V qvq abg svaq
nal fhccyrzragny zngrevny sbe gur fhozvffvba).

> Jr nccerpvngr guvf pbaprea, ohg fvapr gur erivrjre qrpvqrq gb tvir vg gung
zhpu rzcunfvf, jr unir gb envfr gjb cbvagf. Svefg, guvf vf abg fbsgjner cncre,
naq jr qb abg guvax gung gur pbqr fubhyq vzcnpg gur rinyhngvba bs gur zrevg bs
gur zrgubqbybtvpny nqinapr jr nppbzcyvfurq. Frpbaq, gur erivrjre vf abg
pevgvpvmvat pbqr dhnyvgl, ohg ynathntr pubvpr, juvpu jr qb abg guvax vf n
eryrinag zrnfher bs zrevg. Arireguryrff, jr unir nqqrq n fubeg frpgvba ng gur
raq bs gur cncre, jvgu n yvax gb gur qbphzragngvba naq hfre thvqr. Gur pbqr jr
cebivqr vf gubebhtuyl grfgrq, nhgbzngvpnyyl inyvqngrq, naq qbphzragrq. Jr ner
pbasvqrag gung nyy bs gur ryrzragf ner urer gb nyybj n zbgvingrq erfrnepure gb
nccyl bhe zrgubqf gb gurve qngn.

Frpbaq, V guvax gur nhgubef arrq gb thvqr gur ernqre n ovg zber. Jung cerpvfryl
vf gur trareny qvssrerapr orgjrra gur cebcbfrq sbezhynf naq rkvfgvat barf gb
pnyphyngr argjbex cebcregvrf? Sbe vafgnapr, jul pna gur bevtvany zrgevpf abg or
ernqvyl hfrq va gur cebonovyvfgvp senzrjbex. Gel gb rkcynva guvf va n fragrapr
be gjb gb gur (creuncf fxrcgvpny) svefg gvzr ernqre.

> Jr unir nqqrq n srj fragraprf ng **K** naq **L** gb rzcunfvmr ba gur
qvssreraprf. Vg jnf bhe vzcerffvba gung gur svefg gjb fragraprf bs gur bevtvany
frpbaq-gb-ynfg cnentencu bs gur vagebqhpgvba rfgnoyvfurq gur arrq sbe
cebonovyvfgvp zrnfherf pyrneyl: "Gur pheerag jnl bs qrnyvat jvgu cebonovyvfgvp
vagrenpgvbaf ner rvgure gb vtaber inevnovyvgl ragveryl be gb trarengr enaqbz
argjbexf. Cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf ner n zngurzngvpnyyl evtbebhf nygreangvir gb
obgu.". Nf vg jnf boivbhfyl abg fhssvpvrag, jr unir nqqrq n fragrapr orsber, gb
rkcynva gung n zbqvsvpngvba va gur zrgubqbybtl vf arrqrq.

Guveq, gur birenyy vzcbegnag dhrfgvba bs ubj gb rfgvzngr gur cebonovyvgl bs
vagrenpgvbaf erznvaf hanafjrerq. V nz abg fnlvat gung gur cncre fubhyq svaq gur
fbyhgvba gb guvf ceboyrz ohg creuncf fbzr zber qvfphffvba bs gur cenpgvpny
vzcyvpngvbaf bs gur senzrjbex vf arrqrq. Ng cntr 17 guvf vf oevrsyl qvfphffrq
ohg yrnirf gur ernqre jvgu n ybg bs hapregnvagl naq gur zrffntr bs gur cncre
orpbzrf irel gurbergvpny. Jvyy jr or noyr gb eryvnoyl rfgvzngr gur cebonovyvgl
bs n tvira vagrenpgvba, r.t. orgjrra n cnve bs fcrpvrf jvgu ab rkvfgvat
vagrenpgvba qngn? Jbhyq sbe rknzcyr vasbezngvba ba genvgf naq curabybtl bs
fcrpvrf or rabhtu gb cebivqr n tbbq rfgvzngvba bs gur cebonovyvgl bs vagrenpgvba
orgjrra n fcrpvrf cnve? Nohaqnapr bs fcrpvrf jbhyq qbhogyrff or vzcbegnag nf
jryy. Guvf oevatf zr ba gb zl arkg cbvag, gung gur cebonovyvgvrf bs vagrenpgvbaf
ner pbafvqrerq gb or vaqrcraqrag va gur cebcbfrq senzrjbex. Jul vf guvf
arprffnel? Va erny rpbybtvpny pbzzhavgvrf vagrenpgvbaf ner abg vaqrcraqrag, fb V
guvax guvf cbvag arrqf gb or orggre rkcynvarq/nqqerffrq va gur grkg.

> Jr nterr jvgu gur ersrerr gung guvf cncre fubhyq abg fbyir gur dhrfgvba bs ubj
gb zrnfher vagrenpgvba cebonovyvgl. Guvf vf n dhrfgvba sbe crbcyr pneelvat bhg
rzcvevpny zrnfherzragf gb qrpvqr, nf gurl unir gur eryrinag rkcregvfr.
Arireguryrff, jr unir nqqrq na ragver frpgvba gb gur qvfphffvba, ng **K**, gb
tvir fbzr vafvtugf nobhg jura vagrenpgvbaf ner vaqrcraqrag be abg, naq ubj gurl
pna or rfgvzngrq. Guvf vf vagraqrq gb fgvzhyngr n qrongr nebhaq gur hfr bs
cebonovyvfgvp zrnfherf, ohg vf vaqrcraqrag sebz cerfragvat gurz (juvpu vf gur
xrl tbny bs gur cncre).

Ubj qbrf gur zrgubq eryngr gb jrvtugrq argjbexf? Bar nethzrag sbe gur
cebonovyvfgvp nccebnpu vf gb zbir orlbaq gur qrfpevcgvba bs vagrenpgvbaf nf
rvgure/be (0/1). Ohg guvf vf nyernql orvat qbar jvgu gur hfr bs jrvtugrq
zrgevpf. Vg jbhyq or eryrinag jvgu fbzr qvfphffvba ba jrvtugrq if cebonovyvfgvp
argjbexf.

> Jr nterr jvgu guvf cbvag ragveryl. Gur vffhr vf gung gur rkvfgrapr bs na
vagrenpgvba (juvpu jr jbex ba urer) znl abg or eryngrq va gevivny jnlf gb vgf
vagrafvgl (gur jrvtugvat gung gur erivrjre zragvbaf). Jr tvir, ng **K**,
nethzragf sbe jul gur dhrfgvba bs vagrenpgvba jrvtug fubhyq or zbqryrq
frcnengryl sebz gur dhrfgvba bs vagrenpgvba rkvfgrapr.

Cyrnfr rkcynva orggre gur hfr bs Oreabhyyv gevnyf.

> Jr unir nqqrq n pynevsvpngvba ng **K**.

Vzcebir/pynevsl grezvabybtl: Ba C13Y17 vg vf fgngrq gung enaqbz argjbexf ner
trarengrq hfvat Oreabhyyv gevnyf. Vg vf fgngrq gung gurfr ner ovanel argjbexf
(0/1) ohg ner gurfr abg fhccbfrq gb ubyq cebonovyvgvrf (Nvw) vafgrnq bs 0/1?
Gura va gur gnoyr (juvpu unf ab ahzore?) gur nhgubef qvfgvathvfu orgjrra Ovanel,
Oreabhyyv gevnyf, naq Cebonovyvfgvp. Vg vf abg pbzcyrgryl pyrne gb zr jung vf
jung.

> Jr unir nqqrq n pynevsvpngvba ng **K**. Gb fbzr rkgrag, 0/1 argjbexf ner
cebonovyvfgvp argjbexf, jurer nyy aba-mreb vagrenpgvbaf unccra jvgu cebonovyvgl
havgl. Guvf vf n fgeratgu bs bhe nccebnpu, gung obgu ovanel naq cebonovyvfgvp
qngn pna or nanylmrq. Jr unir nyfb rzcunfvmrq guvf cbvag va gur vagebqhpgvba.

C5Y11-12: Fb gurfr zrgevpf ner bayl nccyvpnoyr ba havcnegvgr argjbexf? Cyrnfr
znxr guvf pyrne gb gur ernqre.

> Jr rkcynvarq va gur bevtvany fhozvffvba, va gur frpbaq cnentencu "Fhvgr bs
cebonovyvfgvp argjbex zrgevpf", ubj gb znxr ovcnegvgr argjbexf havcnegvgr va
pnfr gur zrnfher erdhverf vg. Jr unir ercuenfrq guvf fragrapr gb znxr vg
pyrnere.

C6Y1-4: Abg pyrne gb zr jung vf zrnag. Jung vf “gur rknpg inyhr bs gur
aba-cebonovyvfgvp zrnfher”?

> Jr unir ercuenfrq.

C6Y19: Pncvgny R.

> Punatrq.

C8Y20: Cyrnfr pubbfr n zber nccebcevngr/bevtvany ersrerapr ba zbqhynevgl.

> Rfcrpvnyyl va gur nofrapr bs fhttrfgvbaf, jr guvax guvf ersrerapr vf
nccebcevngr rabhtu.

C9Y8: zrnfher jvgubhg f

> Punatrq.

C9Y17: Jung qbrf guvf fragrapr zrna fgnegvat jvgu %QP?

> Guvf jnf n glcb naq unf orra pbeerpgrq.

Rdhngvba 10: V qba’g haqrefgnaq guvf. Ubj pna Pv or rdhny gb Pv  / P ?

> Jr unir pynevsvrq gur grkg. Guvf vf nyfb gur bevtvany sbezhyngvba va Xngm'f
cncre.

C10Y3: Va = vf

> Jr qb abg guvax guvf vf gur pnfr.

C10Y10-11: V jbhyq guvax gung n fcrpvrf jvgu ab bhgtbvat yvaxf jbhyq or n gbc
cerqngbe (vs rqtr qverpgvba fubjf gur sybj bs raretl)?

> Gur pbairagvba vf hfhnyyl gb fubj yvaxf nf vagrenpgvbaf, fb fcrpvrf jvgu ab
bhgtbvat yvaxf rfgnoyvfu ab vagrenpgvbaf (ohg vg vf gehr gung fbzr nhgubef
ercerfrag yvaxf nf sybj bs raretl, va juvpu pnfr gur qverpgvba bs gur "neebj" vf
erirerfrq). Va nal pnfr, nf jr abj rkcyvpvgyl zragvba **K**, bar fubhyq or
pnhgvbhf abg gb vagrecerg gur nofrapr bs bhgtbvat yvaxf nf gur fvta gung n
fcrpvrf vf n gbc cerqngbe va n cebonovyvfgvp pbagrkg. Jr gunax gur ersrerr sbe
envfvat guvf cbvag.

C14Y20: n = bs

> Punatrq.

C15Y2: npdhverq?

> Punatrq.

C17Y12: Pnsrgrevn rkcrevzragf?

> Jr unir nqqrq na rkcynangvba.

Svther 1: Na rkcynangvba bs gur nkrf jbhyq or avpr gb unir va gur yrtraq.

> Jr unir zbirq gur qrfpevcgvba bs nkrf sebz znva grkg gb gur yrtraq, naq
ncbybtvmr sbe univat znqr guvf pubvpr va gur svefg cynpr.

## Erivrjre 2

V unir ernq gur znahfpevcg "Gur fgehpgher bs cebonovyvfgvp argjbexf" ol
Cbvfbg rg ny. va juvpu gur nhgubef qrevir cebonovyvfgvp irefvbaf bs
pheerag zrgevpf bs vagrenpgvba argjbex fgehpgher naq cebivqr rknzcyrf sbe
gurve vzcyrzragngvba. Gur znwbe vaabingvba orvat znqr ol gur nhgubef, obgu
va qrirybcvat gurfr cebonovyvfgvp argjbex zrgevpf naq gur nanylgvp
senzrjbex juvpu vafcverq gurz (r.t. Cbvfbg rg ny. 2015), vf gb fuvsg gur
sbphf bs argjbex nanylfrf njnl sebz punenpgrevmvat fgngvp vagrenpgvba
qngn, naq gbjneqf punenpgrevmvat zbqryf bs vagrenpgvba cebonovyvgvrf.
Nygubhtu gur nhgubef ner abg gur svefg gb hfr cebonovyvfgvp zbqryyvat
nccebnpurf, gurl unir qrirybcrq n cebzvfvat naq zngurzngvpnyyl havsvrq
senzrjbex ryfrjurer, naq gur zrgevpf qrfpevorq va guvf zf ner n pyrireyl
pbafgehpgrq gbbyobk sbe qrfpevovat fbzr nfcrpgf bs argjbex fgehpgher va
shgher fghqvrf hfvat guvf senzrjbex. Gur negvpyr vf trarenyyl jryy
jevggra, ohg ynpxf fbzr onpxtebhaq gung jbhyq uryc pynevsl jul gur zrgevpf
orvat cebcbfrq ner na vzcbegnag pbagevohgvba. Vg nyfb frrzf yvxr fbzr
erfhygf ner rvgure zvffvat, be ner bayl qrfpevorq dhnyvgngviryl (naq
oevrsyl) va gur znva grkg. Orybj, V bhgyvar frireny dhrfgvbaf V unir
ertneqvat gur onpxtebhaq tvira, gur cerfragngvba bs gur Nccyvpngvbaf va
gur zf, naq cbgragvny yvzvgngvbaf bs gur cebcbfrq zrgevpf.


### ZNWBE PBZZRAGF

1. Zber onpxtebhaq vasbezngvba arrqf gb or tvira va gur vagebqhpgvba ertneqvat
gur pbaprcghny senzrjbex zbgvingvat gur qrirybczrag bs gurfr cebonovyvfgvp
zrgevpf (guvf unf orra qrirybcrq ryfrjurer: r.t. Cbvfbg rg ny. 2015, Bvxbf).
Irel yvggyr bs guvf onpxtebhaq vf cebivqrq va gur vagebqhpgvba, naq vf bayl
oevrsyl qvfphffrq va gur 'Vzcyvpngvbaf sbe qngn pbyyrpvgba' fhofrpgvba ng gur
raq bs gur zf. Guvf znqr vg qvssvphyg gb sbyybj ubj bar jbhyq trarengr n
cebonovyvgl zbqry gung gurfr zrgevpf pbhyq or nccebcevngr sbe, naq gurersber jul
jr jbhyq arrq cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf va gur svefg cynpr. Na va-qrcgu rkcybengvba
bs guvf onpxtebhaq vfa’g arprffnel be nccebcevngr, ohg n pyrne naq pbapvfr
rkcynangvba fubhyq or tvira gb uryc pynevsl gur zbgvingvba sbe qrirybcvat gur
zrgevpf qrfpevorq va gur zf. Gb vzcebir pynevgl, V jbhyq nyfb erpbzzraq gung gur
rknzcyrf cebivqrq va gur ‘Nccyvpngvbaf’ frpgvba fgneg ol qrfpevovat ubj gur
cebonovyvgl nqwnprapl zngevk N vf orvat rfgvzngrq sebz qngn, naq fgngvat
fcrpvsvpnyyl jung nfcrpgf bs gurfr zrgevpf’ cresbeznapr rnpu rknzcyr vf
qrzbafgengvat.

> Jr unir erjbexrq obgu gur vagebqhpgvba naq gur "qngn pbyyrpgvba" cnegf, naq jr
ner pbasvqrag gung gur erivfrq znahfpevcg vagebqhprf obgu gur pbaprcgf naq gur
arrq sbe n arj zrgubqbybtl va n zber pbaivapvat jnl. Jr unir nqqrq gur erdhverq
vasbezngvba ba gur rfgvzngvba bs vavgvny nqwnprapl zngevprf ng **k**.

2. Pna gur vagrenpgvba cebonovyvgl zbqryf, naq gur nffbpvngrq zrgevpf, qrfpevor
gur cebonovyvgl bs vagrenpgvba serdhrapvrf/engrf? Gung vf, pna gurl qrfpevor
inevngvba va dhnagvgngvir argjbex fgehpgher? Guebhtubhg gur zf, gur nhgubef
ersre gb ovanel argjbexf, ohg arire fgngr rkcyvpvgyl jurgure gurve zrgubqf ner
yvzvgrq gb gur ovanel pnfr, be vs gurl pna or trarenyvmrq gb qrny jvgu nqwnprapl
zngevprf qrfpevovat inevngvba bs vagrenpgvba serdhrapvrf/engrf. Vs fb, guvf
arrqf gb or pynevsvrq naq rkcynvarq va gur zf (r.t. jung pbafgvghgrf n Oreabhyyv
gevny jura rfgvzngvat vagrenpgvba cebonovyvgvrf sebz serdhrapl qngn?). Vs abg,
guvf envfrf n cbgragvnyyl znwbe yvzvgngvba sbe gur zrgubqf/zrgevpf orvat
cebcbfrq gung fubhyq or nqqerffrq. Gurer vf na rkgrafvir yvgrengher ba qlanzvpny
pbafrdhraprf bs inevngvba va vagrenpgvba fgeratgu sbe rpbybtvpny argjbexf,
vapyhqvat gur qrirybczrag bs znal zrgevpf bs dhnagvgngvir argjbex fgehpgher. Vs
rkgraqvat gurfr zbqryf/zrgevpf gb gur dhnagvgngvir pnfr vf n angheny naq
vagraqrq arkg fgrc, vg zvtug or jbegu rvgure vapyhqvat gurz va guvf zf, be
zragvbavat gurz nf n angheny qverpgvba sbe shgher qrirybczrag.

> Nf jr rkcynva va gur ercyl gb ersrerr 1, jr qb abg guvax gur serdhrapl/engr bs
vagrenpgvba vf nzranoyr gb bhe senzrjbex (naq jr cebivqr n engvbanyr jul ng
**k**). Guvf orvat fnvq, jr nterr gung guvf vf n pyrne arkg fgrc sbe erfrnepu,
naq vqragvsl bar cbgragvny nccebnpu sebz fcrpvrf qvfgevohgvba zbqryf gb chefhr
vg.

3. Va gur vagebqhpgvba [c.3, Y.2-12] gur nhgubef pvgr fghqvrf juvpu unir
qrzbafgengrq gung znal bs gur fnzr argjbex zrgevpf gurl er-qrevir pna or
cerqvpgrq ol cebonovyvfgvp naq yvxryvubbq onfrq zbqryf vapbecbengvat zvavzny
vasbezngvba nobhg fcrpvrf eryngvir nohaqnaprf naq genvg qvfgevohgvbaf. Gur
nhgubef vagrecerg guvf nf rivqrapr gung vagrenpgvbaf fubhyq or ercerfragrq nf
cebonovyvgvrf engure guna ovanel be pbhag qngn. Ubjrire, nabgure (ohg ol ab
zrnaf zhghnyyl rkpyhfvir) vagrecergngvba vf gung pheerag zrgevpf ner abg
cnegvphyneyl vasbezngvir nobhg gur ovbybtl haqreylvat fcrpvrf vagrenpgvbaf. Jul
gura fubhyq jr rkcrpg gur fnzr zrgevpf gb or vasbezngvir jura qrevirq sbe
pnyphyngvba qverpgyl sebz cebonovyvfgvp zbqryf? Jung arj vafvtugf nobhg fcrpvrf
ovbybtl qb jr tnva sebz gurfr zrgevpf jura pnyphyngrq sbe Oreabhyyv cebonovyvgl
zngevprf? Va n svryq gung vf oheqrarq jvgu znal erqhaqnag zrgevpf, na negvpyr
qrfpevovat n fhvgr bs er-qrevirq zrgevpf fubhyq cebivqr pyrne ernfbavat sbe jul
jr arrq zber.

> Jr unir rqvgrq gur vagebqhpgvba gb fubj jul gurfr zrnfherf ner arrqrq -- gur
cebonovyvfgvp nccebnpu gb argjbexf vf tnvavat genpgvba, nf vf pyrne sebz ernqvat
gur yvgrengher, naq gur pheerag zrgevpf ner abg noyr gb hfr guvf vasbezngvba. Nf
jr zragvba va **L**, gur zrnfherf jr cebcbfr urer ner abg arj, ohg engure gurl
ner n er-rkcerffvba bs jryy-rfgnoyvfurq barf va n cebonovyvfgvp pbagrkg.

### ZVABE PBZZRAGF

1. [c.3, Y.13-24]: Gur svefg fragrapr bs guvf cnentencu vqragvsvrf obgu gur
nffhzcgvba bs vainevnag vagrenpgvbaf naq zbagr-pneyb grpuavdhrf nf pheeragyl
hafngvfsnpgbel zrgubqf sbe qrnyvat jvgu vaureragyl inevnoyr fcrpvrf
vagrenpgvbaf. Gur nhgubef cebivqr rknzcyrf bs ceboyrzf gung pna nevfr jura hfvat
vainevnag argjbexf, ohg gurl qba’g znxr n pyrne pnfr sbe jul pheerag
ahyy-zbqry/zbagr-pneyb nccebnpurf, juvpu ner svezyl ebbgrq va cebonovyvfgvp
zbqryyvat, ner hafngvfsnpgbel. Nygubhtu gurl yngre cebivqr fbzr rivqrapr va gur
‘Nccyvpngvbaf’ frpgvba, vg jbhyq or urycshy vs gurl pbhyq tvir fbzr rknzcyrf be
ng yrnfg sberfunqbj jul gurfr nccebnpurf znl or ceboyrzngvp va gur vagebqhpgvba.

> Guvf vf pbeerpg, naq jr unir nqqrq n fubeg fragrapr ng **K**, pvgvat gjb
erprag fghqvrf gung sbphfrq ba gurfr vffhrf va rpbybtvpny argjbexf.

2. [c.12, Y.10]: Cyrnfr rkcynva gur qvnzbaq bcrengbe.

> Svkrq.

3. [c.12, Y.25-28]: Ubj rknpgyl jnf gur nqwnprapl zngevk N rfgvzngrq sebz gurfr
qngn?

> Jr unir nqqrq na rkcynangvba ng **L**.

4. [c.13, Gnoyr]: Fubhyq guvf gnoyr or ahzorerq? Jung vf gur reebe zrnfherzrag
orvat ercbegrq? Fnzcyr inevnapr? Zbagr-Pneyb P.V.? Nanylgvp Inevnapr? Guvf
vasbezngvba fubhyq or cebivqrq, rvgure va gur pbyhza gvgyrf, be nf n abgr ng gur
sbbg bs gur gnoyr.

> Jr guvax gung guvf gnoyr vf fznyy rabhtu gung vg pna or xrcg vayvar, ohg jvyy
qrsre gb gur rqvgbe sbe guvf qrpvfvba. Jr unir nqqrq gur erdhverq vasbezngvba.

5. [c.13. Y. 1-2, Gnoyr 1?]: Gurfr 4 zrgevpf cebivqr n cerggl yvzvgrq zrnfher bs
argjbex ‘fgehpgher’ (2 bs gur arfgrqarff zrgevpf ner aba-vaqrcraqrag, naq gur
3eq vf n shapgvba bs gur bgure gjb). Vg vfa’g arprffnel gb ercbeg pbzcnevfbaf bs
nyy gur cebcbfrq zrgevpf gung pna or pnyphyngrq sbe guvf argjbex, ohg vg jbhyq
pregnvayl tvir n orggre rknzcyr bs gurve hfrshyarff naq cresbeznapr vs zber jrer
znqr ninvynoyr (vs abg va gur znva grkg, gura znlor nf na nccraqvk?). Gur
nhgubef uvtuyvtug gur snpg gung znal bs gurve cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf unir
nanylgvpnyyl qrevirq inevnaprf, ohg gurl pubbfr gb ercbeg arfgrqarff zrgevpf
gung qb abg nccrne gb unir na nanylgvpnyyl qrevirq inevnapr. Gurl nyfb pubbfr n
pnfr fghql gung, sbe gur zbfg cneg, erfhygf va inevnaprf bs 0. Vg jbhyq or avpr
gb frr n zber rssrpgvir qrzbafgengvba bs guvf irel abiry pncnovyvgl bs
cebonovyvfgvp argjbexf naq zrgevpf.

> Jr unir nqqrq na rknzcyr hfvat zbgvs pbhagvat, naq qvfphff jul, rira va gur
nofrapr bs fgebat qvssreraprf, gur cebonovyvfgvp nccebnpu fubhyq or cersreerq
bire Oreabhyyv gevnyf.

6. [c.13, Y.14]:  Gur novyvgl gb qverpgyl pnyphyngr rkcrpgrq inevnaprf sbe
vagrenpgvbaf naq argjbex zrgevpf frrzf yvxr n irel vagrerfgvat naq abiry
nccyvpngvba bs gurfr zrgubqf. Ohg V jbaqre vs 0 be ybj inevnaprf, nf ercbegrq va
guvf pnfr fghql, ner yvxryl gb or n pbzzba erfhyg jura vagrenpgvba cebonovyvgvrf
ner orvat rfgvzngrq sebz cbbeyl-ercyvpngrq ovanel vagrenpgvba argjbexf (juvpu vf
yvxryl gb or gur pnfr tvira gur cenpgvpny punyyratrf bs ercyvpngrq vagrenpgvba
fnzcyvat sbe rpbybtvpny argjbexf yvxr sbbq-jrof naq cbyyvangvba argjbexf).

> Jr nterr jvgu gur ersrerr, naq jbhyq engure abg fcrphyngr ba guvf va gur
nofrapr bs qngn. Jr nqqrq n frpgvba gb gur qvfphffvba, gung rkcynvaf ubj gur
pbasvqrapr vagreiny nebhaq rnpu cebonovyvgl pna or rfgvzngrq sebz gur fnzcyr
fvmr. Gurfr ner, vaqrrq, yvxryl gb or uvtu, juvpu ervasbeprf gur arrq sbe
cerqvpgvir zbqryf va nqqvgvba gb bofreingvbany qngn.

7. [c.14, Y.17-21]:  Gur zrgubqf qrfpevorq urer sbe rinyhngvat gur cresbeznapr
bs cebonovyvfgvp argjbex zrgevpf va gur pbagrkg bs ahyy zbqry ulcbgurfvf grfgvat
arrq gb or pynevsvrq. Nf jevggra, vg vf hapyrne jung pbzcnevfbaf ner orvat znqr,
naq yrff pyrne jung gur pbzcnevfbaf bs vagrerfg ner be fubhyq or. N pbhcyr
fcrpvsvp cbvagf gung arrq pynevslvat:

1) Jung vf ‘A’? Guvf vf bayl rire qrsvarq nf ‘arfgrqarff’, ohg qbrf abg nccrne
naljurer va gur rneyvre fhofrpgvba qrfpevovat gur cebonovyvfgvp zrnfher bs
arfgrqarff (vqragvsvrq ol gur Terrx yrggre rgn). Vf guvf gur arfgrqarff (rgn) bs
gur rzcvevpny argjbex?

> Gur yrtraq unf orra svkrq.

2) Jul ner enaqbz argjbexf orvat trarengrq sbe guvf nanylfvf (Y.17)? V gubhtug
vg jnf cbffvoyr gb pnyphyngr rgn qverpgyl sebz gur cebonovyvgl zngevk
pbeerfcbaqvat gb rnpu ahyy zbqry. Vf arfgrqarff orvat pnyphyngrq sbe gurfr
enaqbz argjbexf, naq gur qvfgevohgvba pbzcnerq gb rgn? Vs fb, vg vf hapyrne
jurer guvf svg vagb gur nanylfvf.

> Nf jr abj fnl va guvf cneg (**K**), naq va gur vagebqhpgvba bs gur
nccyvpngvbaf frpgvba, jr ner vagrerfgrq va pbzcnevat cebonovyvfgvp zrnfherf gb
gur qvfgevohgvbaf trarengrq ol ahyy zbqryf.

Nf vg ernqf, naq sebz Svther 1, vg fbhaqf yvxr gur nhgubef ner cerfragvat 2
pbzcnevfbaf bs gur qvssrerapr orgjrra rgn sbe na rzcvevpny argjbex, naq n ahyy
zbqry: bar rnpu sbe 2 cnvef bs ahyy zbqryf (V if. VV, naq VVVva if. VVVbhg)
(nygubhtu gurl oevrsyl qvfphff erfhygf bs nyy cnvejvfr pbzcnevfbaf va gur grkg
[c.15, Y.9-12]). Vg vf abg pyrne jul gurfr cnegvphyne pbzcnevfbaf ner bs
vagrerfg, bgure guna qrzbafgengvat gung cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf pna vaqrrq or
pnyphyngrq sbe obgu rzcvevpny argjbexf naq cebonovyvgl zngevprf trarengrq ol
ahyy-zbqryf.

> Nf jr abj fgngr va **l**, gur xrl erfhyg sebz guvf pbzcnevfba vf gung gur
nccyvpngvba bs cebonovyvfgvp zrnfherf erirny n cbgragvny ovnf va gur bhgchg bs
ahyy zbqryf -- jr unir nyfb ersreerq gb cerivbhf yvgrengher va fhccbeg bs guvf
pynvz.

8. [c.14, Y.23-25]: V’z abg fher V haqrefgnaq guvf cneragurgvpny fgngrzrag.
Gurer vf ab vasbezngvba tvira ertneqvat gur arfgrqarff inyhrf pnyphyngrq sbe gur
rzcvevpny argjbexf. Ubjrire, fvapr nyy qrygn-A inyhrf ner cbfvgvir, gur
rzcvevpny argjbexf gung erghea ynetr qrygn-A’f zhfg arprffnevyl nyfb unir uvtu
arfgrqarff inyhrf (nygubhtu gur erirefr vf abg arprffnevyl gehr sbe argjbexf
gung erghea ybj qrygn-A inyhrf). Guvf fgngrzrag arrqf zber rkcynangvba, be
fubhyq or bzvggrq. Tvira gur fvzvynevgl va gur pbafgenvagf orgjrra ahyy zbqryf V &
VV, vg frrzf hafhecevfvat gung guvf yvarne eryngvba rkvfgf.

> Jr unir qryrgrq guvf fgngrzrag.

9. [c.15, Y.1-3; Svt. 1]: Guvf frrzf yvxr na rknzcyr bs gur fgebat (naq jryy
xabja) pbinevnapr orgjrra pbaarpgnapr naq arfgrqarff (naq bgure zrgevpf; Xnl &
Fpurzfxr 2004, Ireznng rg ny. 2009, Wnzrf rg ny. 2011) engure guna na
vyyhfgengvba bs jul jr arrq gb er-guvax ubj ahyy zbqryf ner orvat vagrecergrq.
Vs n ahyy-zbqry vf orvat pbafgehpgrq hfvat pbafgenvagf onfrq ba gur pbaarpgnapr
bs gur rzcvevpny argjbex, vg sbyybjf gung vg jvyy erghea arfgrqarff inyhrf gung
ersyrpg guvf aba-vaqrcraqrapr.

> Gur rkvfgrapr bs n pbinevnapr vf ernfba rabhtu gb er-guvax bhe vagrecergngvba
bs ahyy zbqryf, va bhe bcvavba. Jr unir nqqrq ersreraprf ng bgure cynprf (**k**)
gung fhccbeg guvf cbvag bs ivrj.

10. [c.15, Y.5-6]: Jung fvzhyngvbaf? V qba’g frr nal erfhygf ercbegrq sbe
fvzhyngvbaf va gur ‘Ahyy-zbqry onfrq ulcbgurfvf grfgvat’ fho-frpgvba. Ner gur
nhgubef ersreevat gb gurve erfhygf sebz gur ‘Pbzcnevfba bs cebonovyvfgvp
argjbexf’ fhofrpgvba? Vs fb, gurl ercbeg fgebat nterrzrag orgjrra gur
cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf pnyphyngrq qverpgyl sebz gur cebonovyvgl zngevprf naq
Oreabhyyv gevnyf (Gnoyr 1), naq gur ovnf-gb-inevnapr engvb orgjrra gur Oreabhyyv
Gevnyf & Cebonovyvfgvp pbyhzaf nccrnef gb or zvavfphyr sbe gur ‘Yvaxf’ zrgevp,
rira jvgu 10^4 Oreabhyyv gevnyf. Nf sne nf V pna frr, gurer vf ab qrevingvba sbe
gur inevnapr bs gur cebonovyvfgvp arfgrqarff zrgevpf tvira rneyvre va gur zf,
naq ab inevnapr ercbegrq sbe gur Oreabhyyv Gevnyf nanylfvf bs arfgrqarff, fb ab
pbzcnevfba pna or znqr urer.

> Jr unir svkrq guvf fragrapr.

11. [c.15, Y.7-12]: Vg jbhyq or urycshy gb cerfrag gurfr erfhygf va n gnoyr.
Vg’f hapyrne jung gur eryrinapr bs gurfr pbzcnevfbaf vf, bgure guna gb
qrzbafgengr gung cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf pna or pnyphyngrq sbe Ahyy zbqryf. Vg
frrzf gung n zber vagrerfgvat naq hfrshy qrzbafgengvba bs gur fpbcr bs gurfr
zrgevpf’ pncnovyvgvrf jbhyq or gb fubj 1) ubj n cebonovyvgl zbqry vapbecbengvat
n pbzovangvba bs fcrpvrf eryngvir nohaqnaprf naq genvg
qvfgevohgvbaf/rkcrevzragny qngn pna or pbafgehpgrq naq punenpgrevmrq hfvat
cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf, naq gura 2) pbzcnerq jvgu nygreangvir naq/be ahyy zbqryf.

> Gur fhttrfgvba znqr ol gur ersrerr vf sne orlbaq gur fpbcr bs guvf cncre. Jr
unir vafgrnq nqqrq n oebnqre rkcynangvba bs jung guvf rknzcyr qrzbafgengr ng
**k** -- anzryl, gung gur arrq sbe enaqbzvmngvba zbqryf vf yrff boivbhf fvapr jr
pna abj qverpgyl jbex ba gur cebonovyvgl zngevk.

12. [c.15, Y.20]: Jung vf “erfc.”?

> "erfcrpgviryl" -- abj fcryyrq bhg jura svefg hfrq.

13. [c.16, Y.12]: Cyrnfr rkcynva be qrfpevor ‘pnsrgrevn rkcrevzragf’.

> Jr unir nqqrq na rkcynangvba ng **K**.

14. [c.16, Y.20]: Nppbeqvat gb gurve zrgubqf, Byvgb & Sbk (2014) cresbezrq
grzcbenyyl, ohg abg fcngvnyyl ercyvpngrq vagrenpgvba fnzcyvat.

> Jr nterr, ohg jr oryvrir guvf vf n ernfbanoyr gvzr-sbe-fcnpr fhofgvghgvba.

**QT** nal zbqvsvpngvbaf gb nibvq guvf pbzzrag?

15. [Svther 1]: Zbqryf ner vqragvsvrq hfvat U-N ahzrenyf va nkrf gvgyrf (1, 2,
3v, 3b), ohg ebzna ahzrenyf (V, VV, VVVva, VVVbhg) va gur grkg. N zvabe vffhr,
ohg gurfr fubhyq or pbafvfgrag.

> Guvf unf orra punatrq.

16. [Pvgngvbaf]: Fbzr bs gur zber erprag pvgngvbaf unir zvfgnxrf sbe gur lrne
choyvfurq naq ibyhzr/cntr ahzoref (r.t. Cbvfbg rg ny. 2014 -> 2015)

> Gurfr unir orra punatrq.

### GLCBTENCUVPNY/TENZZNGVPNY

[c.3, Y.24] ‘Va gur erprag lrnef…’ -> ‘Va erprag lrnef’ vafgrnq bs

[c.9, Y.3] Pbzzn qbrf abg arrq frcnengr yvar.

[c.13, Y.11] Fragrapr vf zvffvat n fhowrpg. Pbafvqre erfgehpghevat.

[c.15, Y.24] ‘…qbrf abg qrcraqf…” -> ‘…qbrf abg qrcraq…’

[c.16, Y.9-10] Abg fher jung vf zrnag ol ‘... gur reebe vf birenyy frafvgvir…’.

[c.17, Y.28] ‘…rzretrag…’ -> ‘…rzretvat…’?

[c.20, Y.14] Pvgngvba vf zvffvat ibyhzr & cntr ahzore.


## Erivrjre 3

Orybj, V pynevsl fbzr dhrfgvbaf naq pbapreaf envfrq qhevat gur erivfvba naq
cbvag bhg fbzr zbqvsvpngvbaf be pynevsvpngvba juvpu pbhyq or hfrshy gb vzcebir
gur znahfpevcg.

Va guvf fghql, nhgubef cebcbfr n fhvgr bs argjbexf zrgevpf (nttertngrq
fgngvfgvpf) qrfpevovat vagrenpgvbaf nf cebonovyvfgvp riragf (Oreabhyyv
qvfgevohgvba). Gurl nyfb cebivqr n gevny fbsgjner va "whyvn" ynathntr jurer
gurfr zrgevpf pna or pnyphyngrq. Gurl nyfb cebcbfr naq nccyvrq gjb zrgubqf ol
zrnaf bs juvpu vf cbffvoyr rfgvzngr zrgevpf sebz: 1) cebonovyvgl bs vagrenpgvbaf
qverpgyl zrnfherq (svryqjbex bofreingvbaf be yno rkcrevzragf) be 2) enaqbz
argjbexf perngrq hfvat ahyy zbqryf. Gur znva zrevg naq abirygl bs guvf fghql vf
fvgrq ba gur rssbeg gb vzcebir pynffvpny zrgevpf ol vapbecbengvat gur angheny
inevngvba va vagrenpgvbaf, juvpu vf na vzcbegnag fgrc sbe rpbybtvpny argjbexf.
Gur zngurzngvpf oruvaq gurfr zrgevpf frrzf pbafvfgrag gb zr, naq zbfg rdhngvbaf
jrer fhssvpvrag gb haqrefgnaq gur nhgubef engvbanyr (Vs gurl jrer abg pyrne
rabhtu, V gevrq cbvag bhg va qrgnvy orybj). Qrfcvgr bs or na vagrerfgvat
pbagevohgvba, frireny vzcebirzragf fubhyq or gnxra vagb nppbhag gb unir n
znahfpevcg fhvgnoyr sbe choyvpngvba va ZRR.

V jbhyq uvtuyvtug: 1) abgnoyr ynpx bs fhccbeg gb frireny fgngrzragf; 2)
vzcbegnag pbaprcgf jrer bireybbxrq; 3) fbzr ersreraprf jrer vyy pvgrq; 4) va
"nccyvpngvbaf", rknzcyrf pbiref whfg n fznyy senpgvba bs gur cebcbfrq zrgevpf
naq cbgragvny fbheprf bs ovnf jrer abg vairfgvtngrq; 5) gur znahfpevcg vf qrafr
obgu va gur nzbhag bs vasbezngvba naq rdhngvbaf, fb fvzcyre flagurfvf ner
arprffnel, 6) nccyvpnovyvgl bs rnpu zrgevp naq gur ahyy zbqryf gb rnpu fvghngvba
vf abe orvat rkcyberq pyrneyl rabhtu naq 7) ynathntr "whyvn" vf abg bsgra hfrq
ol rpbybtvfgf juvpu jvyy yvzvgf gur nccyvpnovyvgl bs gurfr zrgevpf.

> Jr unir cebivqrq nafjref, naq znqr punatrq jurer arprffnel, gb gurfr cbvagf, nf
jr qrgnvy orybj.

### VAGEBQHPGVBA

Bireivrj - Frireny fgngrzragf ner cbbeyl fhccbegrq ol rivqraprf. Frireny
fragraprf ner hapyrne naq ynpx bs ersreraprf znxr fbzr nethzragf jrnx.
Frys-pvgngvba ner nohaqnag naq fbzrgvzrf gurl ner va hafhvgnoyr cynprf. Fbzr
vzcbegnag yvgrengher va gur fhowrpg (hfvat nccebnpu eryngrq gb cebonovyvfgvp
zngevprf) ner zvffvat naq gura fbzr vzcbegnag pbaprcgf jrer bireybbxrq. V
fcrpvsl orybj fbzr bs guvf pbapreaf, juvpu V oryvrir gb or hfrshy gb vzcebir gur
znahfpevcg:

Cnt 3. Yvar 8. V fgebatyl fhttrfg erzbiny bs gur pvgngvba bs Cbvfbg 2012 urer
naq guebhtubhg gur znahfpevcg. Jul gb pvgr n yvgrengher va serapu naq choyvfurq
va n ybpny wbheany, vs  gurer ner frireny bguref zber fhvgnoyr cncref? Sbe
vafgnapr, Fpuyrhavat rg ny 2014_Rpbtencul 38 naq Onfpbzcgr 2009_Fpvrapr325.

> Gurer unf orra n zvfgnxr jura pbzcvyvat gur cncre, sbe juvpu jr ncbybtvmr. Gur
pbeerpg cncre (Cbvfbg rg ny. 2012, Rpby Yrgg) vf abj pvgrq va gur grkg. Guvf vf
n inyvq ersrerapr gb gur pynvz gung vagrenpgvbaf, naq urapr argjbexf, inel,
fvapr vg vf va guvf cncre gung jr qrirybc gur svefg flfgrzngvp nggrzcg gb
dhnagvsl guvf inevngvba.

Cntr 3. Yvarf 8-10. nhgubef zragvbarq "evpu zrgubqbybtvpny yvgrengher"  ohg ner
pvgvat ab bar. Cyrnfr, cebivqr rivqraprf gb fhccbeg lbhe fgngrzragf.

> Jr ner cebivqvat ersreraprf gb gur zrgubqbybtvpny yvgrengher guebhtubhg gur
cncre, jurarire zrnfherf ner vagebqhprq. Jr oryvrir gung qhcyvpngvat gur
ersreraprf urer jbhyq or njxjneq naq haarprffnel. Jr unir nqqrq n trareny
ersrerapr sbe rpbybtvpny argjbexf.

Cntr 3. Yvarf 11-23. Gurer vf ab pvgngvba va guvf cnentencu. Zngurzngvpny
pbaprcgf ner hfrq ohg ersreraprf ner abg cebivqrq gb uryc ernqre gb haqrefgnaq,
fcrpvnyyl gur gjb ynfg fragraprf. Urer, nethzragngvba nyfb vf dhvgr pbashfr.

> Jr ner abg fher jung gb znxr bs guvf pbzzrag fvapr gurer ner ab pbapergr
fhttrfgvbaf gb tb jvgu vg.

Cntr 3. Yvarf 66-28. "Guvf unccraf orpnhfr, pbagenel gb n ybat-fgnaqvat
nffhzcgvba bs argjbex fghqvrf, fcrpvrf sebz gur fnzr cbby qb abg vagrenpg va n
pbafvfgrag jnl (Cbvfbg rg ny. 2012)". Vf guvf n ulcbgurfvf be ner gurer
rivqraprf? Ersreraprf juvpu pbhyq or pbafvqrerq nf rzcvevpny rivqraprf ner
Znehlnzn rg ny 2014_Ovbgebcvpn naq Gebwryftnneq rg ny 2015_Cebprrqvatf O.

> Rivqraprf ner cerfragrq va Cbvfbg rg ny. 2012 -- nf jryy nf va gur yvgrengher
pvgrq va gur erznvaqre bs guvf cnentencu. Jr unir abarguryrff nqqrq gurfr
ersreraprf.

Cntr 3. Jubyr guveq cnentencu. V fhttrfg gung nhgubef rkcyber gur "sbeovqqra
yvax" pbaprcgf urer. Gheabire va vagrenpgvba ner qrgrezvarq ol fcngvb-grzcbeny
bireyncf ohg nyfb aba-qvfgevohgvbany snpgbef, fhpu nf zbecubybtvpny zvfzngpuvat;
frr Iámdhrm rg ny. 2009_Rpbybtl, Znehlnzn rg ny. 2014, Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny.
2014_Cebprrqvatf O, be bgure snpgbef, r.t. Erabhyg rg ny 2015_Bvxbf. Nyfb va
eryngvba gb gur eryngvir pbagevohgvba bs arhgeny-onfrq irefhf avpur-onfrq
cebprffrf, gjb fghqvrf (Znehlnzn rg ny. 2014, Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny. 2014) unir
fubja gung avpur onfrq-cebprffrf (ercerfragrq ol lrf-ab riragf!) pna or orggre
guna nohaqnaprf va cerqvpgvat vagrenpgvbaf.

> Jr unir nqqrq fbzr bs gur ersreraprf fhttrfgrq. Jr qb abg guvax gung
er-erivrjvat gur yvgrengher urer jbhyq or hfrshy, fvapr jr unir rffragvnyyl qbar
gung va Cbvfbg rg ny. 2015. Va nqqvgvba, "sbeovqqra yvaxf" (nf zrnag ol Byrfra
rg ny.) ner rffragvnyyl gur pbafrdhrapr bs zvfzngpurf va curabybtl, juvpu jr
nyernql zragvba.

Cntr 4. yvarf 13-24. "Gur pheerag jnl bs qrnyvat jvgu cebonovyvfgvp vagrenpgvbaf
ner rvgure gb vtaber inevnovyvgl ragveryl be gb trarengr enaqbz argjbexf.
Cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf ner n zngurzngvpnyyl evtbebhf nygreangvir gb obgu." Urer,
ntnva gurer vf ab pvgngvba. V cnegvphyneyl nterr jvgu zbfg nethzragf ohg
ersreraprf fubhyq or cebivqrq.

> Jr oryvrir gung gur svefg fragrapr vf fhccbegrq ol gur vagebqhpgvba va vgf
ragvergl. Nf sbe gur frpbaq bar, rfcrpvnyyl nsgre gur erivfvbaf, jr ner
pbasvqrag gung vg vf fhccbegrq ol gur cerfrag znahfpevcg.

Cntr 4. yvarf 13-24. "Gur pheerag jnl bs qrnyvat jvgu cebonovyvfgvp vagrenpgvbaf
ner rvgure gb vtaber inevnovyvgl ragveryl be gb trarengr enaqbz argjbexf.
Cebonovyvfgvp zrgevpf ner n zngurzngvpnyyl evtbebhf nygreangvir gb obgu. Jura
vtabevat gur cebonovyvfgvp angher bs vagrenpgvbaf (uraprsbegu ovanel argjbexf),
rirel aba-mreb ryrzrag bs gur argjbex vf nffhzrq gb or 1. Guvf yrnqf gb
bire-ercerfragngvba bs fbzr ener riragf, naq vapernfrf gur ahzore bs
vagrenpgvbaf. Na nygreangvir vf gb pbafvqre bayl gur vagrenpgvbaf nobir n tvira
guerfubyq...". Jul qrfpevor argjbexf nf dhnagvgngvir zngevprf (v.r. serdhrapl bs
vagrenpgvbaf) vf abg n orggre fbyhgvba gb bire ercerfragrq ener riragf? Ol abj,
V qvfnterrq jvgu nhgubef.

> Nf jr abj rkcynva va **K**, gur vffhr bs vagrafvgl naq rkvfgrapr bs gur
vagrenpgvbaf ner qvssrerag barf.

Cntr 5. yvar 1-2. Terng gung vg vf n serr naq bcra fbhepr-fbhepr, ohg jul
"whyvn". Zbfg "argjbex rpbybtvfgf" ner snzvyvnevmrq hfvat E be Zngyno. Va guvf
frafr, V thrff gur erprcgvivgl naq hfrshyarff bs guvf zrgevpf jvyy or irel
yvzvgrq hagvy gurl or ninvynoyr ng fbzr zber cbchyne ynathntrf. Jbhyq or
rkpryyrag vs fbzrbar pbhyq gb perngr n cnpxntr, creuncf yvaxrq gb ovcnegvgr
cnpxntr va E.

> Gur pbqr vf bcra fbhepr, naq pbzrf jvgu n shyy qbphzragngvba. Nalbar jvgu
fhssvpvrag vagrerfg pna cbeg vg gb E vs arrqrq. Gur pber bs guvf znahfpevcg vf
gur pbagevohgvba bs arj zrnfherf, juvpu ner fvzcyr rabhtu gung gurl pna or
er-jevggra va nal ynathntr. Gur vzcyrzragngvba vf n arg tnva sbe hfref, nf nal
pbqr (serryl ninvynoyr naq qbphzragrq nf vf gur pnfr urer) vf orggre guna ab
pbqr ng nyy.

### FHVGR BS CEBONOVYVFGVP ARGJBEX ZRGEVPF

Bireivrj - Gur zngurzngvpf oruvaq gurfr zrgevpf frrzf pbafvfgrag gb zr, naq zbfg
rdhngvbaf jrer fhssvpvrag gb haqrefgnaq gur nhgubef engvbanyr. Cyrnfr, erivrj
pnershyyl guvf frffvba gb znxr pyrnere jura pnyphyngvbaf ner fhvgnoyr sbe
ovcnegvgr be havcnegvgr argjbexf naq nyfb fubhyq uvtuyvtug zngurzngvp
qvssreraprf va rnpu fvghngvba (r.t. pbaarpgnapr) be gur fgebat qvssreraprf va
ovbybtvpny qvfgvapg zrnavat (r.t. pragenyvgl zrnfherf, ihyarenovyvgl).

> Jr unir rqvgrq gur zrnfherf qrfpevcgvba guebhtubhg sbe pynevgl.

Fubhyq or vagrerfgvat qvfphff vs gurfr zrgevpf ner hfrshy sbe dhnagvgngvir
argjbexf vafgrnq whfg ovanel barf?

> Jr abj tvir na rkcynangvba bs jul jr guvax guvf vf abg gur pnfr, ng **l**.

Guvf frffvba vf irel qrafr na sbphfrq va zngurzngvpf oruvaq zrgevpf. Gb erqhpr
pbashfvba va guvf fgebatyl fhttrfg nhgubef gb flagurfvmr vasbezngvba va n gnoyr
juvpu fubhyq unir: Zrgevp'f anzrf, gurve ireony qrsvavgvba, ovbybtvpny zrnavat
(aba znaqngbel), jung pynff bs argjbex ner nccyvpnoyr (ovcnegvgr be havcnegvgr
naq ovanel be dhnagvgngvir vs cbffvoyr).

> Jr qb guvax guvf jbhyq abg vzcebir gur cncre.  Gur qrfpevcgvba bs sbezhyn vf
gur pber bs gur cncre, naq cebivqvat gurz va n gnoyr guvf jbhyq or gbb
flagurgvp, znffvir, jvgubhg nal ebbz gb rkcynva jung gur cnenzrgref zrnaf. Gur
zrgevpf jr cerfragrq jrer nyernql qrfpevorq rneyvre naq va hfr sbe ovanel naq
dhnagvgngvir qngn. Vs jr xrrc bayl gur anzr, ireony qrsvavgvba, zrnavat naq
pynff, gura vg jbhyq fvzcyl ercrng vasbezngvba.

Cntr 5. yvar 16. Nhgubef nffhzrf gung nyy vagrenpgvbaf ner vaqrcraqrag. Frrzf
vzcbegnag nhgubef erghea gb guvf nffhzcgvba va gur Qvfphffvba, naq rkcynva
vzcyvpngvba bs guvf ba gur ernyvfz bs gur rfgvzngvbaf. Gurl whfg pevgvpvmr
cerivbhf fghqvrf nffhzvat gur fnzr guvat.

> Jr unir nqqrq n frpgvba gb gur qvfphffvba, ng **K**. Pbaqvgvbany vagrenpgvbaf
(aba-vaqrcraqrag) ersre, va bhe bcvavba, gb na ragveryl qvssrerag pbaprcg,
anzryl uvture-beqre vagrenpgvbaf. Guvf erdhver n arj sbeznyvfz gb ercerfrag gur
argjbex (orpnhfr na vagrenpgvba zbqvsvre vf n abqr nssrpgvat n yvax nf bccbfrq
gb nabgure abqr). Guvf vf gurersber dhvgr boivbhfyl orlbaq gur fpbcr bs bhe
cncre.

Cntr 5. yvar 17. Ba "trarenyvgl" naq "ihyarenovyvgl". Frrzf arprffnel nhgubef
qrfpevor fubegyl gur ovbybtvpny zrnavatf bs obgu zrgevpf (be vyyhfgengr jvgu
fbzr rpbybtvpny rknzcyr), fvapr gurl qb abg pbzr onpx gb gurz va gur
qvfphffvbaf. Gur fnzr sbe frireny bgure fhofrdhrag zrgevpf yvxr "Cngu yratgu"
naq "Pragenyvgl"

> Jr qb abg guvax gung gurer vf rabhtu ebbz gb qrfpevor gur rpbybtvpny
vagrecergngvba bs rnpu zrgevp bs argjbex fgehpgher. Gurfr ner pbzzbayl hfr va
gur argjbex yvgrengher jr ersre gb. Jr rzcunfvmr urer gung bhe bowrpgvir va guvf
cncre jnf abg gb trarengr n arj frg bs zrgevpf, ohg engure nqncg rkvfgvat bar gb
ercerfragngvba bs vagrenpgvbaf nf cebonovyvfgvp riragf.

Cntr 7. yvar 3. Va beqre gb nibvq pbashfvba, V fhttrfg tvir bgure flzoby gb
Fcrpvrf vafgrnq "x", juvpu jnf nyernql hfrq qb "abqr qrterr".

> Vg vf pbzzbayl uryq pbairagvba gb hfr $v$, $w$, naq $x$ gb qrabgr ryrzragf
gung ner vgrengrq bire, naq jr qb abg guvax guvf perngrf nal pbashfvba urer.

Cntr 7. yvar 14-15. V fhttrfg nhgube vyyhfgengr jvgu fbzr rpbybtvpny fvghngvba
nf rknzcyr.

> Jr ner pbasvqrag gung argjbex rpbybtvfgf jvyy or njner bs jung gurfr
zrnfherf ragnvy.

Cntr 8. Nhgubef fubhyq vqragvsl gur inyhr bs enatr obgu sbe arfgrqarff naq
zbqhynevgl.

> Gur enatr bs arfgrqarff jnf nyernql vqragvsvrq (**K**). Jr unir nqqrq gur enatr bs
inyhrf sbe zbqhynevgl (**K**).

Cntr 10. yvar 17. Jung zrnaf "%QT: gb gur qrterr be trarenyvgl?" ??

> Svkrq.

Zrgevpf qrfpevorq sebz cntr 6 gb cntr 10 (yvar 2) ner jvqryl hfrq va
aba-cebonovyvfgvp irefvba, zber vaghvgvir naq eryngviryl rnfr gb zrnfher sebz
bofreirq argjbexf. Ubjrire, vg vf abg pyrne gb zr, jung vf juvpu qngn gurfr
zrgevpf ("Fcrpvrf jvgu ab bhgtbvat yvaxf", "Fcrpvrf jvgu ab vapbzvat yvaxf" naq
"Ahzore bs fcrpvrf jvgu ab vagrenpgvba") ner onfrq ba. Shegurezber, ovbybtvpnyyl
jung vf gur ernyvfz bs n cerqngbe jvgu ab cerlf va gur pbzzhavgl, sbe rknzcyr?
Nhgubef gevrq qvfphff n ovg gurfr vffhrf va cntr 11 (yvarf 7-10). Creuncf
nhgubef fubhyq cebivqr rknzcyrf naq nyfb qrfpevor orggre gurfr zrgevpf va ertneq
bs gurve nccyvpnovyvgl gb ovcnegvgr argjbexf.

> Jr unir nqqrq n ahzore bs pynevsvpngvbaf, frr **k** naq **l**.

Cntr 12. yvar 4. "Ryrzrag-jvfr cebqhpg" bcrengvba vf nyfb xabja ol Unqnzneq
cebqhpg (sbe vafgnapr, frr Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny 2014). Cyrnfr hfr obgu grezf gb
nyreg ernqref.

> Jr unir znqr guvf zbqvsvpngvba.

### NCCYVPNGVBAF

Cntr 13. Yvarf 15-23. Cyrnfr, qrsvar (naq/be rkrzcyvsl) jung ner
anvir naq aba-anvir nccebnpurf. Shegurezber, vg vf abg pyrne gur vzcyvpngvbaf bs
gur nffhzcgvbaf bs vaqrcraqrapr orgjrra vagrenpgvbaf ba nhgubef' nccebnpu.
Jurgure ryrzragf (abqrf/fcrpvrf) ner bhg bs gur rfgvzngrq argjbex bs pbhefr guvf
jvyy nssrpg zrgevpf... Vf vg jung nhgubef jnag gb fnl?

> Jr unir pynevsvrq guvf cneg.

Cntr 13 yvar 24. Ba "Pbzcnevfba bs cebonovyvfgvp argjbexf". Fb, qbrf erfrnepuref
arrq fbzr n cevbev zrnfher bs cebonovyvgl bs vagrenpgvba (nf Cbhyynva rg ny,
2008) gb pnyphyngr gur zrgevpf cebcbfrq va gur znahfpevcg? Va cntr 6 (yvar 1-2)
nhgubef fgngrf gung vg vf nccyvpnoyr ba ovanel qngn. Cyrnfr, pynevsl va gur
ortvaavat bs lbh cncre va juvpu xvaq bs qngn guvf zrgevpf pna or nccyvrq
cerpvfryl. Fbzr qenjvatf be gnoyrf pbhyq or cebivqrq (va gur Fhccyrzragnel
Zngrevnyf?) gb pynevsl guvf pbashfvbaf. Guvf pbashfvba vf znxvat uneq gb sbyybj
gur cncre.

> Jr unir zbqvsvrq gur vagebqhpgvba bs gur cncre (**K**) gb znxr guvf cbvag
pyrnere. Nf vg fnvq va gur bevtvany fhozvffvba, gurfr zrnfherf *pna* or nccyvrq
ba gur ovanel argjbexf, ohg gurl jvyy jbex ba cebonovyvfgvp argjbexf gbb. Guvf
vf rffragvnyyl n havirefny gbbyxvg.

Cntr 14. Nobhg gur gnoyr. Vf gurer na bofreirq argjbex, evtug? Fb, gur zrgevp
pnyphyngrq inyhrf fubhyq or nyfb cebivqrq. Vg vf vzcbegnag gb pbzcner jvgu gur
rfgvzngrq inyhrf naq pbhyq fubj fbzr cbgragvny vapbatehrapr va gur rfgvzngvbaf
(sbe vafgnapr, fubhyq or vzcbffvoyr gur rfgvzngrq ahzore bs yvaxf gb or fznyyre
guna va gur bofreirq argjbex).

> Gur pnyphyngrq inyhrf, nf abj rkcynvarq va gur cnentencu vzzrqvngryl orsber
gur gnoyr, ner tvira va gur *Ovanel* pbyhza. Va gur pbagenel, vg vf rkcrpgrq
gung gur rfgvzngrq ahzore bs vagrenpgvbaf hfvat cebonovyvfgvp qngn vf ybjre guna
hfvat ovanel barf; gur bayl fvghngvba va juvpu gur gjb dhnagvgvrf fubhyq or
rdhny ner jura nyy vagrenpgvbaf unir n cebonovyvgl bs havgl gb unccra.

Cntr 14-16. Va ertneq bs "Ahyy zbqry onfrq ulcbgurfvf grfgvat." Va gur Svt.1,
onfvpnyyl nhgube pnyphyngr gur qrygn (qvssrerapr orgjrra bofreirq zrgevp naq gur
rkcrpgrq ol gur ahyy zbqry). Jung vf gur qvssrerapr orgjrra gurve nccebnpu naq
gubfr nyernql hfrq ol bgure nhgubef (Sbe vafgnapr, Fpuyrhavat rg ny. 2014_RYR)?
Va juvpu rkgraq, guvf fghql vf birepbzvat gur cerivbhf barf? Guvf frffvba qb abg
frrzf abiry. Vg vf uneq gb haqrefgnaq gur yvax orgjrra gurfr nanylfvf naq gur
zrgubqf gurl ner cebcbfvat. Nhgubef uvtuyvtugrq: "Va fubeg, guvf nanylfvf
erirnyf gung (v) gur ahyy rkcrpgngvba bs n argjbex cebcregl haqre enaqbzvmngvba
fpranevbf pna or bognvarq guebhtu gur nanylfvf bs gur cebonovyvfgvp zngevk,
vafgrnq bs gur nanylfvf bs fvzhyngrq Oreabhyyv argjbexf;(vv) Qvssrerag zbqryf
unir qvssrerag flfgrzngvp ovnfrf, jvgu zbqryf bs gur glcr VVV cresbezvat birenyy
orggre sbe arfgrqarff guna nal bgure zbqryf. Guvf pna or rkcynvarq ol gur snpg
gung arfgrqarff bs n argjbex, nf rkcerffrq ol Onfgbyyn rg ny. (2009), vf gur
nirentr bs n ebj-jvfr naq pbyhza-jvfr arfgrqarff. Gurfr qrcraq ba gur fcrpvrf
qrterr, naq nf fhpu fubhyq or jryy cerqvpgrq ol zbqryf VVV."  Vg vf abg
cerpvfryl abiry, zbfg argjbex cncref unir hfrq ahyy zbqry nanylfvf naq znqr
rfgvzngvba bs "qrygnf" nanylfvf. Gur cbvag gb vapyhqrq guvf frffvba fubhyq or
vzcebirq gb znxr pyrnere.

> Jr unir nqqrq n whfgvsvpngvba bs gur abirygl ng **L**. Nygubhtu vg vf gehr
gung zbfg, vs abg nyy, erprag argjbex cncref hfrq fbzr fbeg bs ahyy zbqry, abar
gung jr xabj bs rkcyvpvgyl gerngrq gur grzcyngr zngevk nf n cebonovyvgl zngevk
sebz juvpu cebcregvrf pna or zrnfherq, ohg vafgrnq erfbegrq gb fvzhyngvbaf. Nf
jr abj rkcynva, guvf nccebnpu unf fbzr ovnfrf gung pnfg n frevbhf qbhog ba gurve
eryrinapr.

Cntr 17. yvar 1-3. Jul nhgubef hfrq arfgrqarff onfrq va Onfgbyyn rg ny (2009)
vafgrnq bs ABQS bs Nyzrvqn Argb rg ny. (2008)? ABQS naq jABQS ner zhpu jvqryl
hfrq.

> Onfgbyyn rg ny. unir vqragvsvrq ovnfrf va ABQS. Gur gjb zrnfherf ner bsgra
rdhvinyrag, ohg jr unir n uvture pbasvqrapr va rgn (vg nyfb jbexf ertneqyrff bs
ebj naq pbyhzaf beqrevat, juvpu jnf na bhgfgnaqvatyl aba-gevivny vffhr sbe
cebonovyvfgvp qrterr frdhraprf). Jr unir nqqrq guvf vasbezngvba ng **K**.

VZCYVPNGVBAF SBE QNGN PBYYRPGVBA

Cntr 17. Yvarf 9. Ercynpr nyy Byvgb & Sbk (2014) pvgngvba ol gur bevtvany
ersrerapr: Iámdhrm rg ny. 2009_Rpbybtl.

> Jr guvax gung Byvgb naq Sbk 2014 vf n zber nccebcevngr ersrerapr fvapr gurl
hfr n zbqry gung vf zber cerqvpgvir guna gur bar hfrq ol Inmdhrm rg ny.

Cntr 17. Yvarf 5-18. Eryngrq gb hfr bs serdhrapl bs vagrenpgvba nf zrnfherf bs
nohaqnaprf (juvpu vf n bsgra hfrq cebprqher va argjbex cncre) cyrnfr pbafvqre
gur vffhrf naq cbgragvny ovnfrf cbvagrq bhg ol Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny. (2014).
Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny. (2014) vf n zber fhvgnoyr ersrerapr urer guna Byvgb & Sbk
(2014) orpnhfr gurl hfrq nohaqnaprf zrnfherq vaqrcraqragyl sebz gur bofreirq
argjbex naq nyfb fvzhyngrq cbgragvny ovnf nevfvat sebz hfr bs serdhrapl bs
vagrenpgvba nf n cebkl sbe fcrpvrf nohaqnapr. Gur bevtvany ersrerapr, Iámdhrm rg
ny. 2009, qb abg qvfphff gurfr vffhrf.

> Jr guvax gung gur cbvagf envfrq ol Ivamragva-Ohtbav rg ny unq cerivbhfyl orra
envfrq ol, r.t., Byvgb & Sbk be Pnaneq rg ny., juvpu ner pvgrq va gur
vagebqhpgvba. Abarguryrff, guvf vffhr snyyf bhgfvqr bs gur fpbcr bs guvf cncre --
jr ner abg gelvat gb rkcynva ubj serdhrapvrf/cebonovyvgvrf fubhyq or zrnfherq,
ohg engure ubj gb cebcreyl rkcybvg vasbezngvba va gur cebonovyvfgvp zngevk.

Cntr 17. Yvar 14-17. "Ba gur bgure unaq, “pnsrgrevn rkcrevzragf” tvir gehyl
vaqrcraqrag cebonovyvgvrf bs vagrenpgvbaf; rira n fvzcyr pevgrevn, fhpu nf gur
serdhrapl bs vagrenpgvbaf jura gur gjb fcrpvrf ner chg gbtrgure, vf n jnl bs
rfgvzngvat cebonovyvgl." Cyrnfr, rkcynva orggre jung qb lbh zrna ol "truly
vaqrcraqrag". Va n erny pbzzhavgl fcrpvrf ner vasyhrapvat erpvcebpnyyl
vagrenpgvbaf bs bgure fcrpvrf vf frireny jnlf (pbzcrgvgvba, snpvyvgngvba, rgp ).
Guvf pnaabg or artyrpgrq.

> Jr nterr jvgu guvf fgngrzrag, ohg unir cebivqrq nethzragf sbe jul bhe
nffhzcgvba vf obgu ernfbanoyr naq gur bayl jnl gb zbir sbejneq ng gur zbzrag, ng
**K**.

Cntr 17. Yvar 14-17 "Hfvat gur nccebnpu bhgyvar ol Cbvfbg rg ny. (2014), obgu
fbheprf bs vasbezngvba (fcrpvrf nohaqnapr naq gur bhgpbzr bs rkcrevzragf) pna or
pbzovarq gb rfgvzngr gur cebonovyvgl gung vagrenpgvbaf jvyy unccra va rzcvevpny
pbzzhavgvrf." Jul abg bgure zrpunavfzf, nf gubfr cebcbfrq ol sbeovqqra yvaxf
pbaprcg (Byrfra rg ny 2011_Cebprrqvatf O), pna or rdhnyyl be zber vzcbegnag guna
fcrpvrf nohaqnaprf (sbe vafgnapr, Ivmragva-Ohtbav rg ny.  2014 naq Znehlnzn rg
ny. 2014, Byvgb & Sbk 2014)?

> Jr unir nqqrq n ersrerapr gb genvg qvfgevohgvba (juvpu vf gur zrpunavfz
haqreylvat sbeovqqra yvaxf).

Cntr 17. Yvarf 27-28. Cyrnfr, cebivqr fhccbeg (ersreraprf) sbe gurfr fgngrzragf.
Gung vf n erpheerag ceboyrz guebhtu va gur znahfpevcg.

> Gurfr ner qvfphffvba fgngrzragf gung fhzznevmr gur znahfpevcg. Jr srry guvf
cnentencu, naq gur znahfpevcg nf n jubyr, ner fhssvpvragyl ersreraprq.
